---
layout: post
title: "Brackets"
date: 2014-03-09 00:00:00 -0500
---
When writing a language where 
```
{ ... }
```
 or 
```
BEGIN ... END
```
 are optional, I always put them in.  Some people say this takes up space when not required, but I find it useful to help clearly define branches in code. 
This: 

```

if(foo)
{
     Console.WriteLine("I am in a branch");
}

```

does not take up much more space than 

```

if(foo)
     Console.WriteLine("I'm in a branch");

```


Adding brackets also makes things more standard as they are still required for multi-line statements in branches.  It also helps prevent the following scenario:


```

if(foo)
     //Console.WriteLine("I'm in a branch");


Console.WriteLine("Because the previous line is commented out, I'm in a branch");

```

I worked on a project where this happened, and it took the team about 45 minutes to track down the problem instead of continuing with development (45 minutes doesn't sound like a long time until you realize that it's 45 minutes * 5 developers).  In a pristine environment, this probably would be easily noticed and corrected, but most legacy code is far from it, and so I prefer every advantage I can have to make code do what I expect it to. 
Some languages won't even allow something akin to the following: 


```

if(foo)
{
   //Console.WriteLine("I still compile and execute");
}

```


In truth, most do, but it doesn't really matter.  The brackets force the end scope of the branch, and don't allow it accidentally affect the next statement in the program.  A lot of people forget that 


```

if(foo)



Console.WriteLine("This is affected by the conditional statement above");


```


because it's common to write the code like so:

```

if(foo)
     Console.WriteLine("This is how most people write it");


```

and in a lot of languages with beginning and ending delimiters, white space is ignored by the compiler.

<style type="text/css">
pre {
    background-color: #f0f0f0;
    padding-left: 10px;
    padding-right: 10px;
    font-size:8pt;
}
</style>