---
layout: post
title: "AI and our Misguided Obsession with Authenticity"
date: 2025-03-12 00:00:00 -0500
categories: General
published: false
---

Years ago, we had a family friend who was a picture framer that was fairly well reconized for his abilites in both in an artistic sense and for his technical skill in making lasting frames with a high attention to detail. Unbeknownst to him, we also happened to know the artist at the moment that he was deeply offended and by and embarresed that he associated with her. It turns out that he dropped in unepxectedly and she was using a project to trace out some of the lines of her painting. To him, no real artist would do this and is a dark secret that would taint even the people who associated with her.

I can't speak for everyone, but I would guess is that people bought her paintings not because they were in awe of her ability to paint freehand, but really because her paintings were pleasing to look at. She used a tool to produce an image of a tone and depiction she wanted to display.

Authenticity has it's place in factoring in an object's importance, but it is both overblown and our own knowledge of something's credulousness is give far too much weight. The most obvious example of people blinding believing and the questioning is that of the photograph. Over the past 30 years with the advancement of computers and now generated images through AI people are concerned that photos will be used to decieve people, but the truth is that the photograph could never truly be trusted, it is only now the masses realize that it is easy to fool them with an item they have been led to believe is the evidence of truth. The first widely acknowledged evidence of a photograph being faked was in the 1840's titled "Self Portrait of a Drowned Man" which is almost 200 years old, and was only 1 year after the photography was officially recognized as an official genre. AI didn't change anything resembling the necessary scrutiny that should have been considered for centuries.

With the painter, the authenticity of her creating the painting without a special tool, to most people doesn't matter. They are paying for the substance and not the process. Many turn a blind eye to it's process and only selectively care when it makes a point for us to discount a piece of art, a profound insight, or a vehicle to convey information. Politicians often don't write their own speeches, CEO's routinely have others draft their executive memos, and a large number of celebrities have ghost writers draft their books for them, yet we have started to scrutenize the average person using a now common tool which accomplishes the same result as the previous examples with a fraction of the cost.

People become angry at AI not because it has fundamentally changed something about the world, but because most people see themselves as potentially, more talented, harder working, or more knowledgalble than others around them. It is the nature of all tools. To the person that had meticluous penmanship, the typewriter removed their advantage at a fraction of effort. To the typist who used the typewriter, the user of the word processor removed the need to carefully protect against careless mistakes. To the people who first had access to a program with spellcheck and then grammer check, they immediately had the advantage that they no longer needed to have consistent concern about those errors, and now with AI the person who can only write rough thoughts and ideas on paper is now on par with creating a document that rivals the fluidity of someone who has been writing in that language for their entire life.

Engineers were once ridiculted for not knowing how to use a slide rule and relied on a calculator and the consequntly relying on a computer. Although some incredible talent cannot be equaled by using a tool like AI, or any for that matter, in most cases that level of isn't necessary and their skill can be supported by others they know. Even whole teams relying on the same set of skills can produce something amazing on their own by working together.
